NGF: Upgrade NGF from 1.x to 2.x (#564)
nginx/documentation: content/ngf/installation/installing-ngf/upgrading-ngf.md

---
title: Upgrade NGINX Gateway Fabric to version 2.x
weight: 400
toc: true
type: how-to
product: NGF
docs: DOCS-0000
---

This guide provides step-by-step instructions for upgrading NGINX Gateway Fabric from version 1.x to 2.x, highlighting key architectural changes, expected downtime, and important considerations for custom resource definitions.

---

### Upgrade from v1.x to v2.x

To upgrade NGINX Gateway Fabric from version 1.x to the new architecture in version 2.x, you must uninstall the existing NGINX Gateway Fabric CRDs and deployment, and perform a fresh installation. This will cause brief downtime during the upgrade process.

{{<note>}} You do not need to uninstall the Gateway API CRDs during the upgrade. These resources are compatible with the new NGINX Gateway Fabric version. {{</note>}}

#### Uninstalling previous NGINX Gateway Fabric v1.x

To remove the previous version 1.x of NGINX Gateway Fabric, follow these steps:

> 1. Run the following command to uninstall NGINX Gateway Fabric from the `nginx-gateway` namespace, updating `ngf` to your release name if different:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, run the following command to uninstall NGINX Gateway Fabric from the `nginx-gateway` namespace, and update the release name to `ngf` to your release name if it is different:
```

```shell
helm uninstall ngf -n nginx-gateway 
```

> 2. To remove the CRDs associated with NGINX Gateway Fabric version 1.x, run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Afterwards, remove CRDs associated with NGINX Gateway Fabric version 1.x with the following command:
```

```shell
kubectl delete -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nginx/nginx-gateway-fabric/v{{< version-ngf >}}/deploy/crds.yaml
```

{{<tabs name="install-ngf-2.x">}}

{{%tab name="Helm"%}}

> Follow these steps to install NGINX Gateway Fabric v2.x using helm:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow these steps to install NGINX Gateway Fabric v2.x using Helm:
```

1. First, apply the new CRDs with the following command:

```shell
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nginx/nginx-gateway-fabric/v{{< version-ngf >}}/deploy/crds.yaml
```

> 2. Next, to install the latest stable release of NGINX Gateway Fabric in the `nginx-gateway` namespace, run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, install the latest stable release of NGINX Gateway Fabric in the `nginx-gateway` namespace with the following command:
```

```shell
helm install ngf oci://ghcr.io/nginx/charts/nginx-gateway-fabric --create-namespace -n nginx-gateway
```

For additional customization options during the helm installation process, take a look at [Installation with Helm]({{< ref "/ngf/installation/installing-ngf/helm.md" >}}).

{{% /tab %}}

{{%tab name="Manifests"%}}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Follow these steps to install NGINX Gateway Fabric v2.x using manifests:

> 1.  First, apply the new CRDs with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply the new CRDs with the following command:
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nginx/nginx-gateway-fabric/v{{< version-ngf >}}/deploy/crds.yaml
```

> 1. Next, to install the latest stable release of NGINX Gateway Fabric in the `nginx-gateway` namespace, run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, install the latest stable release of NGINX Gateway Fabric in the `nginx-gateway` namespace with the following command:
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nginx/nginx-gateway-fabric/v{{< version-ngf >}}/deploy/default/deploy.yaml
```

For additional customization options during the installation process using manifests, take a look at [Installation with Manifests]({{< ref "/ngf/installation/installing-ngf/manifests.md" >}}).

{{% /tab %}}

{{</tabs>}}

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The control plane is a Kubernetes controller that watches Gateway API and Kubernetes resources (e.g., Services, Endpoints, Secrets) and dynamically provisions NGINX data plane deployments for each Gateway.

NGINX configurations are generated by the control plane and securely delivered to the data planes via gRPC, using the NGINX Agent. TLS is enabled by default, with optional integration with `cert-manager`.

Each data plane pod runs NGINX alongside the Agent, which applies config updates and handles reloads without shared volumes or signals. This design ensures dynamic, per-Gateway traffic management and operational isolation.

New fields have been added to the `NginxProxy` resource to configure infrastructure-related settings for data plane deployments. You can modify the `NginxProxy` resource at either the Gateway or GatewayClass level. These new fields provide the flexibility to customize deployment and service configurations.

For detailed instructions on how to modify these settings, refer to the [Configure infrastructure-related settings]({{< ref "/ngf/how-to/data-plane-configuration.md#configure-infrastructure-related-settings" >}}) guide.

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ---

Author: So just leave it at the same level for now?

> ---

Reviewer 2: No, move to a higher level. I say at the very top, maybe after Installation and before How-To guides.

title: Upgrade NGINX Gateway Fabric to version 2.0.0
weight: 400
toc: true
type: how-to
product: NGF
docs: DOCS-0000
---

> This guide provides step-by-step instructions for upgrading NGINX Gateway Fabric from version 1.6.x to 2.0.x, highlighting key architectural changes, expected downtime, and important considerations for custom resource definitions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide provides step-by-step instructions for upgrading NGINX Gateway Fabric from version 1.x to 2.0, highlighting key architectural changes, expected downtime, and important considerations for custom resource definitions.
```

---

> ### Upgrade from v1.6.x to v2.0.x

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Upgrade from v1.x to v2.0
```

Reviewer 2: A user could technically do this from any 1.x version, so I'd update this throughout the doc and not reference 1.6 specifically.

> To upgrade NGINX Gateway Fabric from version 1.6.2 to the latest version 2.0.0, you must uninstall the existing CRDs and perform a fresh installation with the new CRDs. This upgrade involves uninstalling the existing NGINX Gateway Fabric deployment making it a breaking change and will lead to application downtime during the process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To upgrade NGINX Gateway Fabric from version 1.6.2 to the latest version 2.0.0, you must uninstall the existing NGINX Gateway Fabric CRDs and deployment, and perform a fresh installation. This will cause brief downtime during the upgrade process.
```

> {{<note>}} You do not need to uninstall the Gateway API CRDs during the upgrade. These standard Kubernetes resources are compatible with the new NGINX Gateway Fabric version. {{</note>}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{<note>}} You do not need to uninstall the Gateway API CRDs during the upgrade. These resources are compatible with the new NGINX Gateway Fabric version. {{</note>}}
```

These CRDs aren't standard k8s resources.

#### Uninstalling previous NGINX Gateway Fabric v1.6.x

To remove the previous version 1.6.x of NGINX Gateway Fabric, follow these steps:

> 1. Run the following command to uninstall NGINX Gateway Fabric from the `nginx-gateway` namespace:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Run the following command to uninstall NGINX Gateway Fabric from the `nginx-gateway` namespace, updating `ngf` to your release name if different:
```

```shell
helm uninstall ngf -n nginx-gateway 
```

1. To remove the CRDs associated with NGINX Gateway Fabric version 1.6.x, run the following command:

```shell
kubectl delete -k "github.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/config/crd?ref=< ngf-version >"
```

#### Install using Helm

Follow these steps to install NGINX Gateway Fabric v2.0.0 using helm:

1. First, apply the new CRDs with the following command:

```shell

> kubectl apply -k "github.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/config/crd?ref=< ngf-version >"

Reviewer 2: Why not use the same command we use in our existing installation docs?

```

1. Next, to install the latest stable release of NGINX Gateway Fabric in the `nginx-gateway` namespace, run the following command:

```shell
helm install ngf oci://ghcr.io/nginx/charts/nginx-gateway-fabric --create-namespace -n nginx-gateway
```

> For additional customization options during the helm installation process, take a look at [Installation with Helm](../../installation/installing-ngf/helm.md).

Reviewer 2: This isn't how you do relative links in the docs, you need to use `ref`. Same for all other relative links in here.

> #### Install using Manifests

Reviewer 2: You can take advantage of the `tab` functionality in the docs to clean up the way the two methods are displayed. See the existing installation docs for examples.

Follow these steps to install NGINX Gateway Fabric v2.0.0 using manifests:

1.  First, apply the new CRDs with the following command:

```shell
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nginx/nginx-gateway-fabric/v{{< ngf-version >}}/deploy/crds.yaml
```

1. Next, to install the latest stable release of NGINX Gateway Fabric in the `nginx-gateway` namespace, run the following command:

```shell
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nginx/nginx-gateway-fabric/v{{< ngf-version >}}/deploy/default/deploy.yaml
```

For additional customization options during the installation process using manifests, take a look at [Installation with Manifests](../../installation/installing-ngf/manifests.md)

---

### Architecture changes

With this release, NGINX Gateway Fabric adopts a new architecture that separates the control plane and data plane into independent deployments. This separation improves scalability, security, and operational clarity.

> The control plane is a Kubernetes controller built with `controller-runtime`. It watches Gateway API and Kubernetes resources (e.g., Services, Endpoints, Secrets) and dynamically provisions NGINX data plane deployments for each Gateway.

Reviewer 2: This context isn't necessary for this doc.

NGINX configurations are generated by the control plane and securely delivered to the data planes via gRPC, using the NGINX Agent. TLS is enabled by default, with optional integration with `cert-manager`.

Each data plane pod runs NGINX alongside the Agent, which applies config updates and handles reloads without shared volumes or signals. This design ensures dynamic, per-Gateway traffic management and operational isolation.

New fields have been added to the `NginxProxy` resource to configure infrastructure-related settings for data plane deployments. You can modify the `NginxProxy` resource at either the Gateway or GatewayClass level. These new fields provide the flexibility to customize deployment and service configurations.

For detailed instructions on how to modify these settings, refer to the [Configure infrastructure-related settings](../../how-to/data-plane-configuration.md#configure-infrastructure-related-settings) guide.

---

### Key links for the version 2.0.0 update

- To read more on [modifying data plane configuration](../../how-to/data-plane-configuration.md)

> - To read more on [modifying control plane configuration](../../how-to/control-plane-configuration.md)

Reviewer 2: Not really relevant to this release, nothing has changed here.

Author: We do have new fields related to NginxProxy in data plane config. So maybe that is relevant?

Reviewer 2: My comment is just for the control plane doc line 93. All that doc talks about is the NginxGateway CRD.

helm install ngf oci://ghcr.io/nginx/charts/nginx-gateway-fabric --create-namespace -n nginx-gateway
```

> For additional customization options during the helm installation process, take a look at [Installation with Helm]({{< ref "../../installation/installing-ngf/helm.md" >}}).

Reviewer 2: Should not need ellipses `...` in these links.
